Facebook emphasizes that it was in a "private" message, not a public post, that Salvador Ramos announced his intent to kill his grandmother and attack a school. But electronic text messages, including those designed to disappear as soon as read, are not private in relation to the carrier. The intended recipient may never see them but the carrier always does. The message must exist in a database to be seen. Google, until a few years ago, scanned your private email to show you ads. Many email carriers still do. If private electronic messages can be scanned for one purpose, they can be scanned for any purpose.
Bloomberg misquoted Joe Biden in a headline, saying the president demanded the "US 'Stand Up' to Gun Makers after Texas Attack." No he didn't, because he's not an idiot. His actual words were not gun makers but gun lobby, which at least allowed some intelligent ambiguity about whom he was referring to. Gun makers are a nonfactor in U.S. gun policy. They have no clout and little voice relative to the actual gun "lobby," if we can use that word to refer to millions upon millions of pro-gun voters.

Al Gore would have been president in 2000 if he hadn't lost his home state thanks to these voters and the 1994 assault weapons ban. Enacted in horror after the Luby's mass-shooting in Texas, it expired quietly 10 years later because pro-gun voters changed Congress in the same quiet way they denied Mr. Gore the White House.

Of the 20 million guns sold in the U.S. a year, half are clip-fed semiautomatics of the sort handy for slaughter by somebody wanting to make a demented statement. Stopping these sales is not on any legislature's agenda. Getting these guns out of the public's hands would be an even taller order. Wisdom, however, is preserved in cliches: There's more than one way to skin a cat. Ask Google, Microsoft or Facebook, companies that employ data scientists by the thousands, which databases they would have to access to head off the next mass shooting, which privacy restrictions would have to be relaxed. It would be the simplest problem they were asked to solve all week.

In Texas, you can't buy a gun without presenting a driver's license or other government-issued ID, filling out a federal form, undergoing an instant background check, all of which create information in a database. An oversight is Texas' failure to make sure anyone buying ammunition also leaves a record. This can be fixed.
