We're out of words because we're out of thoughts because we said them all and spent them all after Columbine and Sandy Hook and Parkland. The shock was the lack of shock you felt when you heard. You indicted yourself: My heart has gotten cold. No, it hasn't, but the past quarter century it's been numbing up.

We underestimate how demoralizing these shootings are. They hurt our faith in America (why can't we handle this?) and the future (what will it be like if this continues?). And there's the new part of the story that is disturbing, this sense -- we've had it before -- that the police reliably come to the scene but they've got some kind of process or procedure that keeps them from fighting their way to the actual site of the shooting. Parents were massing at the school in Uvalde and screaming, "Go in, go in!" They themselves would have, and were possibly stopped. This aspect of the story is not yet clear but you can't see the emerging videos and not think something went very wrong.
I love cops because I love John Wayne. (Joan Didion: "John Wayne was supposed to give the orders. 'Let's ride,' he said . . . 'Forward ho.'" ) If they're not John Wayne -- commonsensical, gutsy, quick, able to size up the situation -- I don't think I love them. I don't think anyone else does, either.

Conservatives were quick to criticize president Joe Biden in his speech the night of the shootings, saying he didn't "bring us together" and "heal the nation's wounds." But what exactly could he say, could any president say at this point, that will bring us together and heal the wounds? They were faulting him for the impossible. There isn't a bag of magic-secret speechwriter words, you don't pull them from a hat and throw the fairy dust on the listeners. A fair criticism is that Biden's speech evoked a problem without offering a way through it.

He seems to have concluded the right response to the moment was to enact what he felt was the audience's rage and indignation. So he emoted, demanding answers to questions. "When in God's name are we going to stand up to the gun lobby?" He is "sick and tired." "Where in God's name is our backbone?"
